Move Release Process pattern to L2 (Structured) (#524)
gruetter/innerSourceTest: patterns/2-structured/release-process.md

## Title

Standard Release Process

## Patlet

> Teams may be reluctant to use InnerSource projects that they are unfamiliar with when there is no clear release process in the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teams are reluctant to use InnerSource projects that they are unfamiliar with when they are unclear about the release process.
```

Removing timid writers voice. Are you familiar with that expression?

> Providing clear release notes and a published artifact (binary, docker image, jar, etc) gives people confidence you are publishing a quality product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Providing clear release notes and a published artifact gives people confidence you are publishing a quality product.
```

I would leave the specifics to the Solution section, to keep the Patlet short.

If it improves clarity, we could write "release artifact" rather than just "artifact", even though that means we introduce some repetition of the word "release".

## Problem

When a team is deciding whether to use an InnerSource project, one of their considerations is whether they trust that they can rely on the given project for an extended period. Switching the tools/projects that they are using has a cost, so they only want to make those investments sporadically.

> Innersource projects that don't have a published artifact or release process reduces trust. Teams won't know when they can expect the next release, when breaking changes are introduced, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
InnerSource projects that don't have a published artifact or release process reduces trust. Teams won't know when they can expect the next release, when breaking changes are introduced, etc.
```

Spelling fix

## Context

It is common practice in Open Source projects to have releases, with release notes documenting breaking changes, new features, etc along with either a published binary or link to a Docker image. This practice may not be as transparent or well documented/visible for InnerSource projects, modules, etc. Providing robust release notes along with a published artifact that is the result of a documented and visible release process builds trust and confidence in your project.

> A lack of release notes and versioned, released binaries is very often an issue for internal projects. Teams get comfortable with the build process and internalize what goes into a release without showing the details. Any internal project with no pre-built binary or docker image available for external users fits this pattern. Without releasing often, providing clear documentation of what is included in the release, and providing an easy way to use the software, folks may shy away from using and contributing to your application or tool.

Reviewer: According to our [pattern template](https://github.com/InnerSourceCommons/InnerSourcePatterns/blob/main/meta/pattern-template.md), the Context section should describe this:

> Where does the problem exist? What are the pre-conditions? Unchangeable before the solution goes into place. The content here is often tied to the applicability of the pattern for other readers: "Do I have this same particular situation?"

The text that is currently here is helpful, however it might not 100% fit that definition/purpose. It is more a mix of describing the problem, and part of the envisioned solution, isn't it?

I find it quite hard myself to write good Context sections. Some ideas below for what might be the Context at an organization that would benefit from this pattern.

However as you are writing this pattern from the perspective of your organization right now, please adapt it to whatever is true at Comcast.

* Teams at the organization are frequently looking for projects/components created by other teams, that they can use to enhance their own product.
* Teams are used to checking release cadence and release notes to assess the maturity of a given project. 
* When they find an InnerSource projects that suits their needs, teams will also compare it to Open Source solutions. They may choose whatever suits their needs the most i.e. there is no mandate to favor InnerSource over Open Source.
* ...

Reviewer: @dgrizzanti Looks like this is the last piece left on this PR. 

Did you have any other thoughts on this Context section?

Author: hey @spier I haven't had a chance to revisit, but should have some time later this week. Thanks for reminding me 🙂

Author: @spier Looking at other patterns for examples and some help, I see that many of them are just bullet lists that comply with the `Context` section in the template. I took another stab at reformatting both my `Problem` section and `Context` to make it more clear. I realized, like you mentioned, that `Context` had a mix of content and the `Problem` section was a bit all over the place as well (providing a solution and not sticking to defining the problem).

Would it be better as a bulleted list so it's straight to the point or is a paragraph style preferred? I left it as a paragraph but happy to change if needed. Thanks again!

### Added burden of publishing release notes

In addition to building your source code, writing release notes can be tedious without the ability to auto-generate a list of git commits. This would be left for someone to do manually, in addition to writing more high level details on a release.

### Increased difficulty without a location to host artifacts

If a company does not provide a centralized location for storing build artifacts (jars, npm modules, etc.) and docker images, engineers may be left deciding for themselves where is appropriate to store versioned software. Tools like GitHub provide this for you, however, if a company is not using one of these popular tools, this could pose a burden.

## Solution

- CI/Delivery Pipeline is located within your repo to build artifacts (binary, docker image, jar, etc)
- Releases and accompanying build artifacts are generated by CI system at build time
- Release includes notes on New Features, Bug Fixes, and any "Breaking Changes" specifically called out

> A good example of quality Release notes can be found [here](https://github.com/jaegertracing/jaeger/releases)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good example of quality release notes can be found [here](https://github.com/jaegertracing/jaeger/releases).
```

## Resulting Context

Teams who come across your project will see published release notes and gain confidence in your tool. Published artifacts also make using your product easier and quicker to adopt. Having well-defined and visible processes such as these also help with cross-team collaboration and new contributors. Folks can be confident that their contributions are made available and distributed in a reasonable amount of time with a clear usage path.

> Release notes are also a great opportunity to [praise participants](praise-participants.md)! As we know, [documentation is extremely important](project-setup/base-documentation.md) for new folks looking to get involved with your project. Praising outside teammates for contributions, including documentation and release notes is a great way to foster community and grow your user base.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Release notes are also a great opportunity to [praise participants](praise-participants.md)! As we know, [documentation is extremely important](project-setup/base-documentation.md) for new folks looking to get involved with your project. Praising outside teammates for contributions, including documentation and release notes, is a great way to foster community and grow your user base.
```

Is there a comma missing here? I am not sure myself.

## Known Instances

* Comcast (multiple projects)

## Authors

David Grizzanti

## Status

> **Structured**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structured
```

No need to be bold here :)

## Title

Standard Release Process

## Patlet

> Teams are reluctant to use InnerSource projects that they are unfamiliar with when they are unclear about the release process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teams are reluctant to adopt an InnerSource projects when they are unclear about the maturity and longevity of the project.
```

Trying to focus on describing the problem in this first sentence, rather than the "lack of the solution".

What do yo think?

Reviewer 2: I think it might not so much be exactly the maturity and longevity but rather how well the project is supported; i.e., if a problem is found and if they contribute back a fix, how (and how quickly) would that fix appear in a supported release. So, maybe: Teams are reluctant to adopt an InnerSource project when they are unclear about how quickly fixes might appear in a supported release. (Maturity and longevity are other qualities of IS projects that could impact adoption, but this pattern seems to speak more towards active support rather than code maturity/quality). Just a thought.

Reviewer: Interesting thought. 

Both seem related though i.e. 
* a potential consumer sees that the project is actively supported (through regular releases with good release notes)
* => therefore they assume that the project has reached a certain maturity and that they can rely on it for an extended period (longevity)

@dgrizzanti what do you think? What is the thought process that a team goes through before they adopt the project?

Author: I think maturity and longevity are factors when looking to adopt a project, but as @NewMexicoKid mentioned, this pattern wasn't intended to speak to that. Maturity more likely, but not longevity.

I'm going to update the language to include a note about maturity and also try to work in what was mentioned about being "unclear about how quickly fixes might appear in a supported release."

Providing clear release notes and a published artifact gives people confidence you are publishing a quality product.

## Problem

> When a team is deciding whether to use an InnerSource project, one of their considerations is whether they trust that they can rely on the given project for an extended period. Switching the tools/projects that they are using has a cost, so they only want to make those investments when necessary and has tangible benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a team is deciding whether to use an InnerSource project, one of their considerations is whether they can rely on the given project for an extended period. Switching the tools/projects that they are using has a cost, so they only want to make those investments when necessary and has tangible benefits.
```

shortening

It is common practice for Open Source projects to have versioned releases, with notes documenting breaking changes, and new features along with either a published binary or link to a Docker image. This practice may not be as transparent or well documented/visible for InnerSource projects, modules, etc.

InnerSource projects that don't have a published artifact or release process reduces trust. Teams won't know when they can expect the next release, when breaking changes are introduced, etc.

## Context

> Large organizations produce a lot of internal software, much of which could be reused by teams across the company. Operational tooling, software libraries, and Infrastructure as a Service modules are all examples of this. Most large organizations don't publish internal software to be consumed by other teams in the company, however. This can occur either because they are too busy provide documentation or don't realize it's value to others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large organizations produce a lot of internal software, much of which could be reused by teams across the company. Operational tooling, software libraries, and Infrastructure as a Service modules are all examples of this. Most large organizations don't publish internal software to be consumed by other teams in the company, however. This can occur either because they are too busy to provide documentation or don't realize it's value to others.
```

Does the "it's" in the last sentence refer to the documentation or to the project?

Author: Refers to the project - I'll try to make that more clear

## Forces

### Difficult for organizations that don't have a central CI/CD system

For organizations that don't provide engineers a centralized CI/CD system, automating a build and release process can be challenging. The team may need to stand up their own tool (Jenkins, Drone, etc). Without a CI/CD system, builds and release notes can still be produced, however, it may require a local build of the software and manual upload to whichever tool is hosting build artifacts.

### Added burden of publishing release notes

In addition to building your source code, writing release notes can be tedious without the ability to auto-generate a list of git commits. This would be left for someone to do manually, in addition to writing more high level details on a release.

### Increased difficulty without a location to host artifacts

If a company does not provide a centralized location for storing build artifacts (jars, npm modules, etc.) and docker images, engineers may be left deciding for themselves where is appropriate to store versioned software. Tools like GitHub provide this for you, however, if a company is not using one of these popular tools, this could pose a burden.

## Solution

> 
> - CI/Delivery Pipeline is located within your repo to build artifacts (binary, docker image, jar, etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By providing clear **release notes** and a published artifact you increase people's confidence that you are publishing a quality product that they can rely on.

The following are key elements to achieve this:

- CI/Delivery Pipeline is located within your repo to build artifacts (binary, docker image, jar, etc)
```

Many people might jump straight from reading the **Problem** section to reading the **Solution** section. In terms of formatting I would therefore start the Solution with a bit of prose, before using bullets.

Left a draft of how that might look like above but please adapt to your liking.

> - Releases and accompanying build artifacts are generated by the CI system

Reviewer: What are all the things that go into a "release"
a) name of the release (version number)
b) release notes
c) build artifacts (binary, docker image, jar, etc)
d) ...

Would it help us to spell this out in more detail here, in order to understand this pattern? Maybe there are other elements of the release (other than notes+artifact) that help to make the project more trustworthy?

Possible there is another online resource that describes what a "release" is that we can link to?

If this is a tangent that would take us too much time right now, just leave a comment, and we can get back to this at a later point if we find that important.

Reviewer: I tried to find helpful links in a couple of places but could not find anything immediately. 

Just listing where i was looking:

- https://opensource.guide/best-practices/
- https://github.com/semantic-release/semantic-release
- https://un.curl.dev/maintain/release

Author: I tried to clean this up a bit, but generally the 4 items I called out should show maturity and satisfy users of the project. Specifically:
- Semantic versioning
- Release notes mentioned new features, bugs, breaking changes, etc
- Artifacts attached to the release

I've also included an example of "good" release notes which include all of these items.

> - Release includes notes on New Features, Bug Fixes, and any "Breaking Changes" specifically called out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Release includes notes on New Features, Bug Fixes, and any "Breaking Changes" are called out specifically
```

Teams who come across your project will see published release notes and gain confidence in your tool. Published artifacts also make using your product easier and quicker to adopt. Having well-defined and visible processes such as these also help with cross-team collaboration and new contributors. Folks can be confident that their contributions are made available and distributed in a reasonable amount of time with a clear usage path.

Release notes are also a great opportunity to [praise participants](praise-participants.md)! As we know, [documentation is extremely important](project-setup/base-documentation.md) for new folks looking to get involved with you project. Praising outside teammates for contributions, including documentation and release notes is a great way to foster community and grow your user base.

## Known Instances

> Comcast (multiple projects)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Comcast (multiple projects)
```

formatting this as a list, to motivate further orgs to add themselves here
